Wrote a more user-friendly Readme file (#70)
xarray-contrib/xdggs: README.md

## Key Features

- **Seamless Integration with Xarray**: Use `xdggs` alongside Xarray's powerful tools for managing labeled, multi-dimensional data.
- **Support for DGGS**: Convert geospatial data into DGGS representations, allowing for uniform spatial partitioning of the Earth's surface.
- **Spatial Resampling**: Resample data on DGGS grids, enabling downscaling or upscaling across multiple resolutions.
- **DGGS Aggregation**: Perform spatial aggregation of data on DGGS cells.
- **Efficient Data Management**: Manage large datasets with Xarray's lazy loading, Dask integration, and chunking to optimize performance.

## Installation

To install `xdggs`, you can clone the repository and install it using pip:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/xarray-contrib/xdggs.git
cd xdggs
pip install .
```

Alternatively, you can install it directly via pip (once it's available on PyPI):

```bash
pip install xdggs
```

## Demo

![xdggs demo](xdggs-cropped.gif)

## Getting Started

> As an example, this is how you would use `xdggs` to reconstruct geographical coordinates from the cell ids then make interactive plotting indicating cell ids and associated Latitude and Longitude coordinate:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an example, this is how you would use `xdggs` to reconstruct geographical coordinates from the cell ids then create an interactive plot indicating cell ids, data values and the associated geographical coordinates:
```

```python
import xarray as xr
import xdggs

> # Load your Xarray dataset made using ./examples/prepare_dataset_h3.ipynb

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Load the dataset created by ./examples/prepare_dataset_h3.ipynb
```
Though in the future we should definitely create a set of tutorial datasets.

Reviewer 2: Will you change and merge ? or I need to change?

ds = xr.open_dataset("data/h3.nc", engine="netcdf4")

# Decode DGGS coordinates
ds_idx = ds.pipe(xdggs.decode)

> # Assigne Latitude and Longitude coordinates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Assign geographical coordinates
```

ds_idx = ds_idx.dggs.assign_latlon_coords()

> # Make interactive plotting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# interactive visualization
```

# xdggs

`xdggs` is an extension for [Xarray](https://xarray.pydata.org/) that provides tools to handle geospatial data using Discrete Global Grid Systems (DGGS). It allows efficient manipulation and analysis of multi-dimensional gridded data within a DGGS framework, facilitating spatial data processing, resampling, and aggregations on both global and regional scales.

## Key Features

- **Seamless Integration with Xarray**: Use `xdggs` alongside Xarray's powerful tools for managing labeled, multi-dimensional data.
- **Support for DGGS**: Convert geospatial data into DGGS representations, allowing for uniform spatial partitioning of the Earth's surface.
- **Spatial Resampling**: Resample data on DGGS grids, enabling downscaling or upscaling across multiple resolutions.
- **DGGS Aggregation**: Perform spatial aggregation of data on DGGS cells.
- **Efficient Data Management**: Manage large datasets with Xarray's lazy loading, Dask integration, and chunking to optimize performance.

## Installation

To install `xdggs`, you can clone the repository and install it using pip:

```bash

> git clone https://github.com/your-repo/xdggs.git

Reviewer: ```suggestion
git clone https://github.com/xarray-contrib/xdggs.git
```
although it is possible to install directly:
```sh
pip install git+https://github.com/xarray-contrib/xdggs.git
```

cd xdggs
pip install .
```

Alternatively, you can install it directly via pip (once it's available on PyPI):

```bash
pip install xdggs
```

## Getting Started

Here's a quick example of how to use `xdggs` to convert your Xarray data to a DGGS grid and perform resampling.

```python
import xarray as xr
import xdggs

# Load your Xarray dataset
ds = xr.open_dataset("data/h3.nc", engine="netcdf4")
ds_idx = ds.pipe(xdggs.decode)
ds_idx.dggs.sel_latlon(np.array([37.0, 37.5]), np.array([299.3, 299.5]))

ds2 = ds_idx.dggs.assign_latlon_coords()

result = ds_idx.dggs.sel_latlon(ds2.latitude.data, ds2.longitude.data)

xr.testing.assert_equal(result, ds)
...

# Save the processed data
xarray_data.to_netcdf('resampled_data.nc')
```

## Dependencies

> - Python >= 3.8
> - Xarray >= 0.19
> - NumPy >= 1.19

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Python >= 3.10
- Xarray >= 2023.09.0
- NumPy >= 1.24.0
```

> - Dask (optional, for parallel computing)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Dask >= 2023.10.0 (optional, for parallel computing)
```
(we don't directly use `dask`, though, so may also be dropped instead)

You can install the dependencies with:

```bash
pip install xarray numpy dask
```

## Documentation

You can find additional examples in [https://github.com/xarray-contrib/xdggs/tree/main/examples](https://github.com/xarray-contrib/xdggs/tree/main/examples).

## Roadmap

> We have exciting plans to expand xdggs with new features and improvements. You can check out our roadmap in the [design_doc.md](design_doc.md) file for details on upcoming features, future enhancements, and release timelines.

Reviewer: I don't think we should mention release timelines at all, that just sets the wrong expectations (timelines only work if there's a fixed amount of time allocated to a team of developers – which is not the case for us).

# xdggs

`xdggs` is an extension for [Xarray](https://xarray.pydata.org/) that provides tools to handle geospatial data using Discrete Global Grid Systems (DGGS). It allows efficient manipulation and analysis of multi-dimensional gridded data within a DGGS framework, facilitating spatial data processing, resampling, and aggregations on both global and regional scales.

## Key Features

- **Seamless Integration with Xarray**: Use `xdggs` alongside Xarray's powerful tools for managing labeled, multi-dimensional data.
- **Support for DGGS**: Convert geospatial data into DGGS representations, allowing for uniform spatial partitioning of the Earth's surface.
- **Spatial Resampling**: Resample data on DGGS grids, enabling downscaling or upscaling across multiple resolutions.
- **DGGS Aggregation**: Perform spatial aggregation of data on DGGS cells.
- **Efficient Data Management**: Manage large datasets with Xarray's lazy loading, Dask integration, and chunking to optimize performance.

## Installation

To install `xdggs`, you can clone the repository and install it using pip:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/xarray-contrib/xdggs.git
cd xdggs
pip install .
```

> Alternatively, you can install it directly via pip (once it's available on PyPI):

Reviewer: this is already the case, but the version is from last year.

We'll probably have to think about releasing a new version sometime soon.

```bash
pip install xdggs
```

## Demo

![xdggs demo](xdggs-cropped.gif)

## Getting Started

> Here's a quick example of how to use `xdggs` to convert your Xarray data to a DGGS grid and perform resampling.

Reviewer: I don't think this is the right description, with this we're not converting nor resampling, we simply assign lat / lon coordinates and save it back to disk. Something like this might be better:
```suggestion
As an example, this is how you would use `xdggs` to reconstruct geographical coordinates from the cell ids:
```

```python
import xarray as xr
import xdggs

# Load your Xarray dataset
ds = xr.open_dataset("data/h3.nc", engine="netcdf4")
ds_idx = ds.pipe(xdggs.decode)

> ds_idx.dggs.sel_latlon(np.array([37.0, 37.5]), np.array([299.3, 299.5]))

Reviewer: the result of this operation is immediately discarded. Since this can be misunderstood as an inplace operation, can we either remove this or assign the result to a variable and make use of it?

Author: I just made a copy/paste from the first example I found but I think we should put a more relevant example. What would be better to have here?

Reviewer: not sure. The most important parts of `xdggs` right now are:
- decoding / creating the index
- selecting by geographical coordinates without actually having the geographical coordinates on the object (`sel_latlon`)
- extracting cell center coordinates from the cell ids (`cell_centers`, and the older `assign_latlon_coords`)
- extracting cell boundaries from the cell ids (`cell_boundaries`)
- plotting with `lonboard` (`explore`)

Reviewer 2: I updated the readme.  I concentrated the example only for loading file, assigns coordinate, plotting.  More detailed part can be in the documentation, other example files.  
The essential needs from simpler / first usage is that you can load and plot (and in the same interface for H3 & Healpix &....

ds2 = ds_idx.dggs.assign_latlon_coords()

result = ds_idx.dggs.sel_latlon(ds2.latitude.data, ds2.longitude.data)

xr.testing.assert_equal(result, ds)
...

# Save the processed data
xarray_data.to_netcdf('resampled_data.nc')
```

## Dependencies

- Python >= 3.8
- Xarray >= 0.19
- NumPy >= 1.19
- Dask (optional, for parallel computing)

You can install the dependencies with:

```bash
pip install xarray numpy dask

> ```

Reviewer: this will be pulled in by the dependency mechanism, so might not be necessary to list separately?

Reviewer: yes, I think it would be better to remove it. We already list the dependencies, so if that's truly important (not sure when that would be, other than of xdggs development) people can just write that command on their own.
